First of all, let me say I miss this
energy. I'm employee number one, Girish
Matraudam, employee number one at
Freshworks. How many of you here are
co-founders of your own startup?
Awesome. Let's give it up for all the
founders.
And let me start off by telling you that
I've been there hustling for business in
all of these booths uh every year till a
few years ago till I stopped coming. So,
so I miss that energy and excitement and
I want all of you to keep doing what
you're doing and soon we'll see you on
stage uh uh sharing your stories. So
today
I'm here to talk about
five decisions or five big bets that
worked for me. So thankfully I don't
have to talk about the hundred that
didn't. So,
and I'm going to use a fishing analogy
here to just try and keep it more
interesting for me. Otherwise, it's very
boring if you just keep talking about go
to market strategies and things like
that. So, so we'll use a fishing analogy
to try and make it a little bit more
interesting. So
as you probably saw in the video,
Freshworks
was founded in October 2010
in Chennai, India in a small suburb
which most people in Chennai wouldn't
know where it is and we had or or let's
say let me say we were foolish enough to
believe that we can start there and
build a global software product company.
In 2010 it sounded foolish. I think now
how many of you here are from India?
Wow, this looks like an India
conference. So,
so starting in India, there's always a
famous uh lesson that today every
founder will know. It's it's actually
much easier to sell to global customers
than selling to Indian customers. You
know, Indian customers are notorious for
hijacking your product road map and and
you can never sell outside once you
start selling to India. So, so that was
now I can talk about it as a big bet
that paid off but uh I think truly that
was probably the best decision that we
took in those days of how do we go
global from day one and and Freshworks
was truly global from day one. So we did
not try I did not try going and meeting
customers in India trying to sell to
companies in India. So when we had I
think seven customers they came from
four different continents. Our first
customer was from Australia. They're
still a customer at college from Perth,
Australia. So I think that was a big
lesson in hindsight that many
entrepreneurs,
many colleagues who worked at Freshworks
and now entrepreneurs, they're all
following like we have 31 startups uh
that have come out of Freshworks. So I'm
super proud of that and some of them are
here. So the big lesson is try to go
after a bigger market. it it's like
increases your chances of success than
getting stuck in a very small niche
market. So so casting your net wide the
bringing the fishing analogy to life. So
we were betting on inbound and
productled growth before productled
growth became a term. So, so we were PLG
is fancy now in the last four five years
we have this term coin but but 2011 our
first customer came online tried the
product for two and a half hours put
their credit card and bought the
product. So so that was probably the
best uh or the biggest addition that
worked well. We are an inbound company
even today
we have 40% of our revenue is completely
SMB customers 100% inbound we also have
inbound feeding mid-market customers but
but this was really uh
what worked for us but I I would like to
share some uh stories around this uh so
you can see picture of my family uh okay
I was uh a little bit I don't recognize
the guy over there but uh
So let's say things have changed for
good now. So this is 2011.
The story I want to tell you is how we
won the Microsoft Bispark India Startup
Challenge. So I shared a personal story
as as a startup founder, you want to
break the rules. So instead of showing
the product and the demo, I actually
talked about uh what entrepreneurship uh
how it changes lives. And in my previous
job, I had a bigger car and I had to buy
a small hatchback as after starting a
company and bushapping it and my kids
don't understand the difference between
working a corporate life versus being an
entrepreneur at that time. So they were
quite sad that they couldn't sleep in
the back seat of the car and I was
sharing the story along with the product
and uh so we ended up winning the
Microsoft Bispark uh challenge and it
was $40,000 first price at that time. No
equity uh no safe note free cash from
Microsoft. That was the oxygen supply
for Freshworks in the early days. So
I'll tell you the total capital in the
company at that time
was $85,000. So this is almost 50% of
our uh capital coming in from Microsoft.
But what did I do? I did not add it into
the kitty and try to extend the runway.
The next two months I ended up spending
$45,000
figuring out all the online channels to
see which ones will scale for us because
I had made the decision to be going
global and going inbound. So ended up
spending all the money on Google
Adwords. some of it in Google Adwords
very expensive when you're very early
stage you know that even more expensive
now u like tried LinkedIn ads even more
expensive than Google Adwords figured
out a lot of channels uh smaller
channels that wouldn't scale but still
was giving us leads for much lower rates
so at the end of that $45,000 spend we
ended up having 70 customers in 2 months
which was great for a startup and and
also helped us get funding from Excel,
the first round of funding, uh, when we
had 70 stranger customers from all
around the world paying us an average of
$30 a month. So, we had $2,100 of MR,
but that was enough to get us a million
dollar funding. And that's why I said
it's a big bet that paid off, the
addition to go global, the decision to
splurge the entire $40,000 and some more
in two months to get those customers.
Not super efficient at that time, but I
think overall it played out well. So
that's the story I wanted to share about
betting on inbound casting your net wide
go for a larger market.
Okay. The second bet is around hiring.
Now a lot of you are sitting here. So
San Francisco is
probably the the at least used to be
before co uh the place for uh SAS
talent. What do you do when you start a
company in a city like Chennai in 2010
2011 and you're trying to hire people?
There is literally very little
experienced been there done that talent
and the willingness to join a startup
that's probably just raised a million
dollars like it wasn't very easy it
wasn't easy or we just couldn't find the
talent right so I think that's where the
bet was on and I've been told or I've
been asked several times in the early
years to either move to Bangalore
because you can't find the talent in
Chennai or move to Silicon Valley
India so That message kept coming
several years but we decided that hey we
can build a company and be successful
from wherever we are. We just need to
find people who are willing to work with
us. And so the bet was on hiring younger
talent with a learning mindset. And I'll
tell you I'll share the secret sauce of
our hiring. Uh I don't know how many of
you are aware of the book uh called
first break all the rules by Marcus
Bingham. So what I learned from that
book is about the difference between
skills, knowledge and talent. So skills
are easily teachable. Knowledge is
something where factual knowledge is
again easily teachable or learnable.
Experiential knowledge comes from of
course experience. But talent is what
you're naturally born with. And so we
decided to bet on the inherent talent in
employees even if they did not have the
experience. So I'll give you an example
and and you have to understand this with
context. So in India pretty much
everybody finishes engineering and then
figures out what to do with life and
many of them would 70% would be computer
science engineering and then they'll put
up their hands and say I want to do do
sales I want to do marketing. So that is
the social structure of India right? So,
so if I want to hire customer support, I
could be hiring a biomechanical
engineer, but if if she's I would check
for empathy, detail orientation,
patience. So, those are the skills with
which I would hire somebody in customer
support. If I'm hiring somebody in
pre-sales, uh I would actually look at,
hey, do they have the ability to think
on their feet? Can they adjust their
level based on the audience skill level?
You can be talking to a power user or
you can be talking to a layman user. Can
you teach something? So these are some
of my interview hacks. So the entire bet
was really based on like what I learned
from that book. You can't put in what
God intentionally left out. So ignore
the
educational background especially in
India where everybody's a computer
science engineer. So ignore their
experience sometimes because they may
not be in the right uh uh job right now.
So but focus on what they're truly good
at. If you're hiring a salesperson, I
should enjoy having a conversation with
you. Think about it. when did you last
buy something from someone like you
enjoy the conversation with the
saleserson can they talk about any
topic. So we went to the basics of
betting on the core skills of the uh
talent and or core skills of people and
then unlocking that uh talent. I can
actually name examples from in the
audience but I won't. I I'll actually
show you uh by the way I'll also tell
you that when we were before I talk
about this candidate I'll tell you our
programming language was Ruby on Rails
till employee number 69 we did not hire
a single programmer who actually knew
Ruby on Rails. We hired great
programmers and figured out that okay
they can learn Ruby on Rails and and
then contribute. So I'm not making this
up. So this is an uh from LinkedIn a
screenshot that we I picked last week.
So this is uh an ex employee called
Syram. So he
you see here.
Okay.
So the first marketing job that I had
posted on LinkedIn for freshworks. So I
got 85 applications. I had people who
had worked for eight years um in
marketing in India not in software. So I
had experienced people with three four
years and he was a fresher just out of
college finished his MBA and I was
looking I had asked everybody to send in
writing samples because sitting in
Chennai with an inbound model market
product marketing is all about content
right you have to do SEO you have to do
website content so I was looking for a
really good content writer who can write
engaging content so of the 85 rums or or
application that I got like his was the
best blog blog. He had a blog. He had
sent a blog link. I saw deeply engaging
stories, random people coming and
commenting. So, so that is how we gave
the job to him. And you can see he's had
a very successful marketing career over
the years uh twice at Freshworks. So,
and this is I think it's especially
useful for many of you here. You have to
accept the fact that when you're a young
startup, you may not be able to attract
all the talent that you want. And also
today it's cool to work in a startup.
2010 in India 2011 it wasn't cool.
People weren't rushing to join a startup
right. So so you have to learn how to
work within the constraints that you
have. And so this ended up to be like
really really great. We found an amazing
team where people were happy to come in
and learn on the job but also contribute
and grow. So
okay big bet three.
See a lot of times when people look at
Freshworks um they don't really
understand what is the true
differentiation of Freshworks. So our
business model of going global going
inbound from India spending a lot of
money on online marketing and online
acquisition but actually servicing all
of those leads from a lowc cost location
like India very low our sales if you
look at our early years our sales cost
would be like 20% of the CAC marketing
would be 80%. I I haven't seen that
anywhere else in the world. Right? So
that was truly the differentiator and we
knew that I I had booked I always wanted
to build a multi-product company. I had
actually booked 40 domains starting with
fresh in 2010. So now I had to convince
our investors to let me build the second
product. And we actually built our
second product when fresh desk our first
product was not even a million dollars
in revenue because we had conviction in
the model. We're going after a large
market. uh we are going inbound and we
are able to close deals from Chennai. So
we said okay we we also saw that
I'll probably uh show you the product
evolution journey. So Fresh Desk was the
first product we launched in 2011. What
I saw even as early as 2012 was one out
of every four or five customers of
Freshesk was actually using Freshesk as
an internal employee help desk. And like
we I knew how to build an employee uh
support system because I had built four
help desks in the past. So instead of
taking the same product and putting a
marketing website saying hey you can use
uh fresh desk for IT support like some
of our competitors do that. So we
actually purpose-built an ITSM product
today. So this second product fresh
service which we launched in 2014 today
is north of $260 million AR. You can
tell the numbers because I was at an
investor date today morning. So it's
public information. So
also along the years what we noticed was
hey some of our customer like we saw
customers using or asking us for like
chat or they wanted to support customers
on modern messaging channels or uh cloud
telephon. So we added uh chat and and
fresh chat and fresh caller as modern
messaging and cloud telephony. In 2016,
we actually unveiled our customer 360
vision because we saw that
hey we were struggling oursel with a
with sales tools, a marketing tool and a
support tool that our own we were using
fresh test but data was siloed. So we
thought hey there has to be there has to
be a better way. So we thought okay how
can we have a single record for the
customer. So we then launched fresh
sales in 2017 16 fresh marketer in 2017
and our Freddy AI. So I I'll talk about
that in a bit. we launched in 2018. So
as of last month, August 2023, we
launched the Freshworks customer service
suite which is an omni channel customer
service helping businesses
B2C companies engage with their
customers on like Instagram or Apple
business chat. Today business want to
have conversations with their customer.
So the reason I'm showing you all of
this is as a founder you have to be
planning ahead.
The the work that you do in product
today is going to help you in revenue 2
three years down the line and especially
once you have product market fit in the
first product when the revenue is coming
in that's when you will have the time to
actually invest in the second product.
If you don't do that, let's say like
last year or this year, the macro gets
tough and investors are asking you to
cut down the spend, you may not be able
to invest uh in your second product at
that point of time. So, so while your
sales team is thinking one quarter ahead
or about this quarter, you should also
worry about that as a founder. But at
some point of time at least once every
quarter you have to be asking hey how am
I going to you have to assume that okay
if things go well if you're successful
how does the company look like 3 months
down the line 3 years down the line two
years down the line so you have to be
planning for revenue that's going to
come 2 years down the line so that is uh
something that we have always done uh
thinking ahead of building multiple
products that's serving us well now our
second product is actually the fastest
growing product now better than our
first uh uh flagship larger product.
Okay, so this is not a big bet. This is
a lesson. Uh so when you are building
multiple products, right, when you're
building doing so there's always this
famous uh theory like how can you do so
many things? So at Freshworks we have a
culture
code. One of the values is
craftsmanship. So I will use this
example of making biryani to uh help
everyone understand. How many of you
here do not know or haven't never tasted
biryani?
Okay. Very few. Okay. So
so this is this uh authentic flavorful
uh Indian dish. You can find it now in
many parts of the world. So I'll share
the story of uh Dindal Talapakati
biryani. It's a it's a small town tier 2
town in India which makes flavorful
delicious biryani. So the first
generation built this built this out of
a small restaurant. Many people who are
traveling along that city would take
detours to go in have lunch there and
then go because the food was so amazing.
The biryani was awesome. And the second
generation is now actually building a
business on this biryani. So they have
now I think 25 30 stores. They have one
in Milpas as well and definitely I think
in New York and uh Singapore. So
but you have to and and of course when
you're building a business you have to
take care of all the metrics like uh
single store profitability average
selling price uh uh per table or per uh
person all of that. But you have to
understand that the foundation of the
business is in the biryani. The day the
biryani loses its original recipe or
flavor, the business will collapse. Why
am I saying this now? As founders, we
need to understand that
all the metrics that we talk about in
our bo to our board or to our investors.
So they are all important for
leadership. They're important for the
board. But you cannot push down the
metrics to the people. So you have to
celebrate your employees for making
biryani. So like if if your marketer is
writing a a a brilliant blog post or
your adwords person is coming up with a
creative campaign or let's say your
product person has really built a cool
feature. So employees need to be
celebrated for
making biryani or or actually creating
those whatever doing whatever they are
good at because the combination of those
ingredients is what brings that biryani
for your business. If you focus too much
on the metrics and push it down to
employees, not everybody's excited about
a billion dollars in revenue or 5
million in revenue, they're not excited
about sales people can be excited about
hitting a target, but employees need to
be celebrated for what they're really
good at and and what value they're
adding. So that's why what I call as
making brani. So this story is told to
everybody in Freshworks. I've told this
to multiple startup events because it's
important as founders to understand what
you care about in metrics may not be
what your employees care about.
Okay, moving on. Um, so big bet four.
So one of the things we realized in our
inbound, a lot of times people think
when you're doing inbound it means SMB
customers, small customers, right? But
what most people don't realize is you
can close larger deals inbound. Like
even as early as 2013 and 14, we had
closed uh Burger King, 3M, Schneider
Electric, uh McMillan Publishing,
Pearson, Sony, all of these customers
actually came inbound.
Average SMB customer would buy like four
or five seats of Fresh Desk like Burger
King was 300 seats. Uh so we had like we
were closing several customers with 100
seats and 200 seats all from Chennai.
Could be a $50,000 deal. big celebration
would happen but it'd be closed on the
phone from Chennai. So I would say we
were covid ready 10 years before covid
so in terms of selling remotely so
so basically the uh once we realized
that what we wanted to do was hey how do
we now take the product to more
mid-market and larger enterprise
customers. So how do we overlay a field
sales motion on top of the inbound
motion that was working. Now it's really
really hard to have two go to market
motions. I'll tell you we we are going
through that uh phase and uh but but if
you want faster growth you have to do
it. Every company that started with PLG
or inbound at some point of time you can
see they will overlay a field sales
motion. Dropbox is a great example.
So
here is an example again uh I think this
was 2015 or 16 where we did a PR saying
hey we announced Cisco as the 30,000
customer but you have to understand
inbound it was not an enterprise license
uh across Cisco it was one team in Cisco
coming and buying for them but it still
uh helped us like when when Proctor and
Gamble saw this they came to us and said
hey we saw that Cisco is using your
product so we would like to come and
evaluate right so I think it's important
to understand the power of inbound. It's
it's not just about uh SMB customers and
now we decided okay a product is working
well in these larger companies and many
times what starts out as a 25 seat 50
seat 100 seat deal would expand to
several hundred seats. So and and that
is still ongoing even as we speak now
right so so that's when we decided okay
why don't we go and overlay this field
sales motion and go after larger
customers. So today 60% of our revenue
for Freshworks comes from mid-market uh
what we call as mid-market and
enterprise companies which is companies
from 250 to 5,000 and 5,000 and above is
enterprise.
Okay, one more lesson before we go to
the uh big bet again, right? So,
especially I'm I'm saying this after
overlaying the field sales motion is
because see as a founder when when your
teams or employees are coming and
talking to you, you have to learn the
kadoscope lesson. What I mean by that is
hey there are so many different lenses
and you should be aware of these lenses
through which people speak because you
have to understand where they coming
from. Like I I'll give you a very uh
famous story which will illustrate the
point. I once had my sales leader uh a
field sales leader come and tell me that
gee we have to stop these day passes. We
used to have a concept of a day pass
where people instead of buying a a named
user license for a month they could buy
a flexible uh day pass which means you
can come and access the product for a
day. So we had that for seasonal users
or for managers who wanted to come and
take a look at a report or things like
that. So it it was a a feature that
customers loved and
they were buying day passes as and when
they needed it and they could buy like
100 200 day passes and use it like Skype
credit or Skype. So
So one day I had my head of sales come
and say we need to stop these day
passes. It's actually uh customers are
abusing it and uh
we we have to push people to name
license. Now when your head of sales is
saying something like this, you
immediately start up a team, right? So I
had uh a program started where we had um
engineers, data analysts, everybody
looking at all the data, looking at
which customers were abusing it, how
much revenue would we lose if we were
going to do day pass, how can we make up
for that revenue. So it became a big
project and we had like 10 people in a
meeting room actually talking about the
impact of stopping day passes right and
engineering had to work on that we had
to integ change our billing systems to
stop that uh like our finance teams have
to be informed so it's a big project but
then finally when we looked at the
customer data like there was only one
customer who was using a lot of day
passes and that is the customer that I
had personally given in the early days
when we didn't have certain
functionality we said okay you use more
day passes to compensate for that. So
there was no real abuse. So then as we
were peeling the onion finally we we got
the uh real reason that our sales
compensation plan did not actually
compensate people for selling day
passes. So that was not uncovered and it
it came to me as customers are abusing
day passes and we have to stop selling
it. Right? So I think I'm I'm giving you
this as a real example because a lot of
times you will see there's a product
lens like product manager should want to
increase adoption. salespeople will want
to make their commission this month or
this quarter which is all fair but you
as the CEO or founder have to be aware
of all these different lenses and
understand where people are coming from
and and so I thought it's a good lesson
to share especially when you have these
different gotom market motions like for
example product marketing for large
enterprise and SMB inbound is very very
different
okay
last bet so how do you know where the
fish is going to be like how do you be
stay ahead of the curve So I think what
we did well in freshworks was see today
we all talk about genai and chat GPD. So
we asked ourselves this question in 2016
or 17 that hey what could really kill us
and where is our opportunity where is
our threat right what could kill us. So
clearly AI was the biggest threat that
we we were not looking at any of our
competition that's going to crush us. So
we didn't see find a threat in our
competition. So but AI was the threat.
So we invested early. We launched our
Freddy AI in 2018. So we have customers
using our bots and AI for several years
now. But with Gen AI, there's a lot more
excitement. There's a lot more. There's
a refresh of Freddy AI that we uh
presented 2 months ago which is getting
a lot of excitement. But you have to be
knowing what's coming. So you have to
ask that question like what can kill
you? What's changing in the landscape?
Same way we took a big bet on customer
360 because your AI is only as good as
your underlying data. So when we saw the
bet on AI, it was not just a technology
bet. We and you know that we have
companies that do AI work only on
telephony data, companies that do AI
work only on marketing uh adwords pend
data. There are companies that do AI
work only on chat data. So but we said
okay where is the real value for a
business for AI going to come from? it's
going to come from understanding
everything about the customer. So that's
where the customer 360 made sense. So
it's not just about the UI for a support
person or salesperson. It's all about
the AI. So
So this is uh Freddy, we we chose Freddy
to be again in 2018 there was a lot of
fear in customer support teams that AI
is going to replace the agents jobs. I
think the fear is still persist but we
wanted our Freddy to be like uh a
friendly a friend to the human. So so no
better representation than a dog. So
freshest buddy is short the short form
is Freddy. So we launched uh this is
2018 and by the way I'll also share
another story. It's not like all the big
bets that happen. Sometimes you also
need a little bit of luck and and this
is a story that many of you uh may know
when we were a really young startup 2011
we had I think at that point of time 200
SMB customers. We we were just going to
announce or we just announced a $1
million funding from Excel and the next
day we were attacked on Twitter to be a
ripoff of uh Zenesk and I I can see our
friends at Zenesk are in the booth here.
So please go and visit them and show
them some love. Uh but uh in 2011 uh so
we were attacked to be a ripoff. What we
figured out was uh again the story you
can go and read on ripoff or not.org.
They had employed a p paid blogger to
talk bad about us. But the lesson here
is sometimes as a startup you also get a
stroke of luck that happens. It's a it's
sent by God, right? So this moment where
we instead of fighting on Twitter, we
responded with the website. We exposed
what was happening and the whole
internet community uh we were on hacker
news for 30 hours at the top post and
for three days on the top page. the
entire community supported us and from
that point onwards like Fresh Desk was
the alternative to Zenesk and the entire
PR. Uh thank you.
So that's why I would say if you're a
small startup don't worry it's not about
the size of the dog in the fight it's
about the fight in the dog. So uh so if
all publicity is good publicity you have
to set yourself up in the minds of
customers as who are you fighting
against right. So I think that is uh
a story and a lesson that I want to
share and with that I think I'll just
summarize quickly and then we can move
on to Q&A. So these are the five big
bets that worked for Freshworks. We went
after a large market, casting our
netwide, going global, betting on
inbound. Our hiring strategy focused on
hiring young people with a learning
mindset, but mapping their core talent
uh to whatever job that they would be
doing. We went multi-roduct early on.
When things were good, that's the time
to go multi-product. So, we overlaid a
field sales motion because we saw that
our product was working well in larger
companies. so we can go and acquire more
larger companies and then also staying
ahead thinking about what would be the
next big opportunity or what could kill
you and being ready for that so when a
chat GPD moment happens you're ready uh
to take advantage of that. So with that
I would like to say thank you